Changelog for 8.9.0 (#3106)
elastic/elastic-agent: changelog/8.9.0.asciidoc

// begin 8.9.0 relnotes

[[release-notes-8.9.0]]
==  8.9.0

Review important information about the  8.9.0 release.

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.9.0]]
=== Breaking changes

Breaking changes can prevent your application from optimal operation and
performance. Before you upgrade, review the breaking changes, then mitigate the
impact to your application.

// TODO: add details and impact

elastic-agent::

[discrete]
[[breaking-https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2890]]
.Status Command, Change Human Output To Be A Summary, Added Full Output. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2890[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2890] 
[%collapsible]
====
status command has been changed, the default human output now uses a list format and summaries output. Full human output can be obtained with the new `full` option.
====

[discrete]
[[new-features-8.9.0]]
=== New features

The 8.9.0 release adds the following new and notable features.

CLI::

> * Add The Logs Subcommand To The Agent Cli. {CLI-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745] {CLI-issue}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the logs subcommand to the agent CLI. {CLI-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745] {CLI-issue}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114]
```

elastic-agent::

> * Allow Upgrade To Snapshots. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752] 
> +
> Allow upgrade to a specific snapshot version by specifying the build id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support upgrading to specific snapshots by specifying the build ID. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752] 
```

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.9.0]]
=== Enhancements

Universal Profiling::

> * Deployment/Kubernetes - Add Elements For Universal Profiling. {Universal Profiling-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add additional elements to support the Universal Profiling integration. {Universal Profiling-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881] 
```

elastic-agent::

> * Lowercase Reported Hostnames Per Elastic Common Schema (Ecs) Guidelines For The Host.name Field. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2767[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2767] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Lowercase reported hostnames per Elastic Common Schema (Ecs) Guidelines for the `host.name` field.
```
Strange. The linked PR 2767 is to bump a Go version: https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2767
Maybe we should just remove the link.

[[new-features-8.9.0]]
=== New features

The 8.9.0 release adds the following new and notable features.

CLI::

* Add the logs subcommand to the agent CLI. {CLI-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2745] {CLI-issue}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/114]
elastic-agent::

* Support upgrading to specific snapshots by specifying the build ID. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2752] 

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.9.0]]
=== Enhancements

Universal Profiling::

* Add additional elements to support the Universal Profiling integration. {Universal Profiling-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2881] 
elastic-agent::

* Lowercase Reported Hostnames Per Elastic Common Schema (Ecs) Guidelines For The Host.name Field. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2767[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2767] 

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.9.0]]
=== Bug fixes

elastic-agent::

> * Change Monitoring Socket. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/3096[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/3096] {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2912[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2912] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Change monitoring socket to use a hash of the ID instead of the actual ID. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/3096[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/3096] {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2912[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2912] 
```

> * Fix Drop Processor For Monitoring Components. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2982[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2982] {elastic-agent-issue}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/2388[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/2388]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix the drop processor for monitoring component logs to use the `component.id` instead of the dataset. {elastic-agent-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2982[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2982] {elastic-agent-issue}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/2388[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/issues/2388]
```

synthetics::

> * Bump Node To 18.16.0. {synthetics-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2696[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2696] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Update Node version to 18.16.0. {synthetics-pull}https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2696[#https://github.com/elastic/elastic-agent/pull/2696] 
```
